```
  !! This event should be hosted in the teaching lab so participants can practice using commands !!
```

# Intro to Linux

## What is Linux?

Linux is a family of operating system like Windows or macOS, but it is free (as in food) and open source (the source code is publicly available).
All of the lab machines in UTCS run on Linux (Ubuntu with the GNOME Desktop Environment, if you want to be specific).

## The terminal

The program where you type in commands to interact with your computer.

## Anatomy of the terminal

Command and output, username and host, current directory

## Vocab

- **Directory**: Folder
- **Home Directory**: The ‘main’ folder for your user, usually represented with ‘~’
- **Root Directory**: The topmost folder of your filesystem, usually represented with ‘/’
- **Host**: The machine you are connected to
- **Root/Superuser**: The ‘admin’ user, has no restrictions (on the lab machines, this is the department, on your own machine it’s you!)

## Basic Commands

- `ls`: List the files in your current directory
- `pwd`: Show your present working directory
- `cd [a]`: Change directories to [a], cd by itself returns to ~ (home)
- `touch [a]`: Make the file [a]
- `cat [a]`: Print the contents of [a] (technically it’s made to concatenate files but it’s mainly used to print the contents). `tac` will print it backwards!
- `mkdir [a]`: Make the directory [a] (you can also use md [a])
- `mv [a] [b]`: Move file/dir [a] to file/dir [b] (also used to rename)
- `cp [a] [b]`: Copy file/dir[a] to file/dir [b]
- `rm [a]`: Remove the file [a] (to remove a folder, add -rf flags)
- `man [a]`: Show the manual pages for the command [a]

## Anatomy of a Linux Command

```
rm -rf foobar.txt /foo
```

- **Command**: The command to be run, in this case, remove.
- **Flags**: Optional settings you can turn on for this command. They are always preceded by a ‘-’. Here the ‘r’ means recursive (delete all sub-directories and files) and the ‘f’ means force (don’t confirm that I want to delete these files).
- **Arguments**: The inputs the command needs. Here, these are the files/dirs to delete. Arguments are separated by spaces

## Directory Structure

- `.`: current directory
- `..`: parent directory

## Chaining Commands

- `foo && bar`: Run ‘foo’ command, and if it finishes successfully, then run ‘bar’
- `foo; bar`: Run ‘foo’ command, and then run ‘bar’, whether or not ‘foo’ finished successfully

## Challenge

0. Log into lab machine
1. Navigate to home directory
2. Make a directory called test
3. Navigate into test (and check your present working directory)
4. Make a file called foo
5. Run echo ‘hello’ > foo to put ‘hello’ into the file foo
6. Copy the file foo to the file bar
7. List the files in the directory to check you have two files
8. Move the file bar to the file baz to rename it
9. Remove the file baz

## Questions?
