# Vim and Emacs

## What is Vim and Emacs?

Vim and Emacs are both editors that run directly in the terminal. They (normally) do not open up with a GUI, and are primarily controlled with the keyboard rather than the mouse (of course, all of these things can be changed/customized).

There is a long standing "war", between the users of the two editors about which is better. Kind of like the tabs vs. spaces war (of which the winner is, of course, tabs mapped to 4 spaces).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Editor_war

## Wait, but I already use Sublime/Atom/VS Code/Eclipse/a stone tablet and chisel?

GUI Editors are great for local machines, but if you are SSH'd into a machine (like the lab machines), it can be difficult or impossible to use a GUI application. Since Vim and Emacs operate entirely in the command line, they work over SSH (and just generally open and run faster than a big GUI application).

## Vim - Modes

One of the main features of Vim is its different modes. It has 4 modes: Normal, Insert, Visual and Command. You'll mainly interact with Normal and Insert mode (unless you want to dive deeper into Vim). Normal mode is used to navigate around the file, and it's the mode that you are dumped into when you first enter Vim. Insert mode is used for actually editing the file. You need to type in a command to enter Insert mode, and then you will stay in Insert mode until you press `Esc` to return to Normal mode.

## Vim - Moving around a file

`vim foo.txt` will open the file `foo.txt` (or create it, if it doesn't exist yet) in Vim. You will start in Normal mode. To move around the file, you can use the arrow keys or `h` (left), `j` (down), `k` (up), and `l` (right). You can jump to the top of the file with `gg` and to the bottom of the file with `G`.

## Vim - Editing a file

To enter Insert mode, press `i` to insert before the cursor. You can also press `I` to start inserting at the beginning of the line, `a` to append after the cursor, and `A` to append at the end of the line. After you enter Insert mode, you can insert text like a normal text editor, and you can still move around using the arrow keys. To return to Normal mode, his `Esc`.

## Vim - Saving and Quitting

To save your file, hit `Esc` to return to Normal mode, and then type `:w` (write to disk) and `Enter`. To quit, hit `Esc` and then type `:q`. To save and quit in one fell swoop, you can just type `Esc` and then `:wq!`. If you want to quit without saving, type `Esc` and then `:q!` to quit and discard any unsaved changes (!).

Note: you don't actually have to his `Esc` every time, just typing `:wq` when you're in Normal mode will work. But, if you use `Esc` every time, then you don't have to think about which mode you're in and you'll be sure you're in Normal mode. 

## Emacs basics

## Nano

## Resources

`vimtutor`
